The accuracy of a construction cost estimate determines the success of a construction project as it directly impacts resource allocation, budgeting, delivery time and project feasibility. Traditional cost estimation methods e.g. analogous, parametric and unit costing are known to rely heavily on historical data and expert judgements which are often prone to inaccuracies and lead to inefficiencies in construction projects.
This study explores the “Application of Artificial Intelligence (AI) Models for an Improved Construction Cost Estimation” leveraging numerical data. Four models were developed for this thesis namely: Random Forest, Decision Tree, Linear Regression and Support Vector Model. These models were trained on dataset sourced from an online data repository featuring entries from 1000 construction projects using features like material cost, labor cost, profit rate and others.
The performance of these four models were evaluated using root means square error, mean square error and r-square and it was found that linear regression performed excellently well to others.
This study found that AI models outperformed traditional cost estimating methods in terms of accuracy, scalability and automation, however some challenges were also identified as limitations to the study.
The demonstration of potential of AI Models to accurately predict Construction cost estimates is a contribution to the body of knowledge of Construction Cost Estimating, highlighting a structured evaluation framework while also recommending future directions of study. 
